docs(thanos): add migration doc for thanos storage clients (#16133)
grafana/loki: docs/sources/setup/migrate/migrate-storage-clients/_index.md

---
title: Migrate to Thanos storage clients
menuTitle: Migrate to Thanos storage clients
description: Migration guide for moving from legacy storage clients to Thanos storage clients.
weight: 
---
# Migrate to Thanos storage clients

> Loki 3.4 release introduces new object storage clients based on [Thanos Object Storage Client Go module](https://github.com/thanos-io/objstore).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Loki release 3.4 introduces new object storage clients based on the [Thanos Object Storage Client Go module](https://github.com/thanos-io/objstore).
```

> One of the reasons for making this change is to have a consistent storage configuration across LGTM+ stack. If you are already using Grafana Mimir or Pyroscope, you can reuse the storage configuration for setting up Loki.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the reasons for making this change is to have a consistent storage configuration across the entire Loki, Grafana, Tempo, and Loki stack (LGTM+). If you are already using Grafana Mimir or Pyroscope, you can reuse the same storage configuration for setting up Loki.
```

> This is an opt-in feature with Loki 3.4 release. This would be made the default way of configuring storage in future releases and the existing storage clients will be deprecated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is an opt-in feature with the Loki 3.4 release. In a future release, Thanos will become the default way of configuring storage and the existing storage clients will be deprecated.
```

The new storage configuration deviates from the existing format. The following sections describe the changes in detail for each provider.

> Refer to the [thanos storage reference](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/<LOKI_VERSION>/configure/#thanos_object_store_config) to view the complete list of supported storage providers and their configuration options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to the [Thanos storage configuration reference](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/<LOKI_VERSION>/configure/#thanos_object_store_config) to view the complete list of supported storage providers and their configuration options.
```

> ### Enabling the new storage clients

Reviewer: Needs a blank space after the heading.
```suggestion
### Enable the new storage clients

```

> 1. Enable thanos storage clients by setting `use_thanos_objstore` to `true` in the `storage_config` section or by setting `-use-thanos-objstore` flag to true.
> 1. When enabled, configuration under `storage_config.object_store` takes effect instead of legacy storage configs

Reviewer: Combining these because step 2 isn't really a separate step.  Also, need a blank space before the code block.
```suggestion
1. Enable Thanos storage clients by setting `use_thanos_objstore` to `true` in the `storage_config` section or by setting the `-use-thanos-objstore` flag to true. When enabled, configuration under `storage_config.object_store` takes effect instead of legacy storage configurations.

```

   ```yaml
   # Uses the new storage clients for connecting to gcs backend
   storage_config:
      use_thanos_objstore: true # enable the new storage clients
   object_store:
      gcs: 
         bucket: "example-bucket"

>    ```

Reviewer: You need a blank space before and after each code block.

> 1. You can also configure the new clients in the common storage section if you prefer to use the common config section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. As an alternative, you can also configure the new clients in the common storage section if you prefer to use the common config section.
```

   ```yaml
   storage_config:
      use_thanos_objstore: true # enable the new storage clients
   common:
      storage:
         object_store:
            gcs:
            bucket: "example-bucket"
   ```

> 1. Ruler storage should be configured under `ruler_storage` section when using the new storage clients.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Ruler storage should be configured under the `ruler_storage` section when using the new storage clients.
```

   ```yaml
   storage_config:
      use_thanos_objstore: true # enable the new storage clients
   ruler_storage:
      backend: gcs
      gcs:
         bucket: "example-bucket"
   ```

{{< admonition type="note" >}}
Following sections document the steps for migrating the clients. Only some of the commonly used parameters are listed here.

> For a complete list of supported parameters, refer to the [thanos storage reference](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/<LOKI_VERSION>/configure/#thanos_object_store_config) and compare that to what you are using in your setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a complete list of supported parameters, refer to the [Thanos storage configuration reference](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/<LOKI_VERSION>/configure/#thanos_object_store_config) and compare that to what you are using in your setup.
```

{{< /admonition >}}

### GCS Storage Migration

> When migrating from the legacy GCS storage client to the new Thanos-based client, you'll need to update your configuration parameters as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When migrating from the legacy [Google Cloud Storage (GCS)](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/<LOKI_VERSION>/configure/#gcs_storage_config) storage client to the new Thanos-based client, you'll need to update your configuration parameters as follows:
```

{{< responsive-table >}}
| Legacy Parameter | New Parameter | Required Changes |
|-----------------|---------------|------------------|
| `bucket_name` | `bucket_name` | No changes required |
| `chunk_buffer_size` | `chunk_size_bytes` | Rename parameter to `chunk_size_bytes` |
| `enable_retries` | `enable_retries` | No changes required |
{{< /responsive-table >}}

**Example configuration migration:**

Legacy configuration:
```yaml
storage_config:
  gcs:
    bucket_name: example-bucket
    chunk_buffer_size: 10MB
    enable_retries: true
```

New configuration:
```yaml
storage_config:
  use_thanos_objstore: true
object_store:
  gcs:
    bucket_name: example-bucket
    chunk_size_bytes: 10MB
    enable_retries: true
```

> ### S3 Storage Migration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Amazon S3 Storage Migration
```

> When migrating from the legacy S3 storage client to the new Thanos-based client, you'll need to update your configuration parameters as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When migrating from the legacy [Amazon S3](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/<LOKI_VERSION>/configure/#aws_storage_config) storage client to the new Thanos-based client, you'll need to update your configuration parameters as follows:
```

{{< responsive-table >}}

> | Legacy Parameter | New Parameter | Required Changes |

Reviewer: Would it make sense to put these parameters in alphabetical order?

Author: i tried to list them in the order they appear in the configuration reference. we could do it in alphabetical order, but i am not sure if it improves things :)

Reviewer: Ah, that makes sense.
I was trained to always alphabetize lists, unless there is a reason not to.

| `bucket_names` | `bucket_name` | Rename parameter to `bucket_name` |
| `access_key_id` | `access_key_id` | No changes required |
| `secret_access_key` | `secret_access_key` | No changes required |
| `session_token` | `session_token` | No changes required |
| `insecure` | `insecure` | No changes required |
| `disable_dualstack` | `dualstack_enabled` | Rename parameter to `dualstack_enabled` and invert logic |
| `storage_class` | `storage_class` | No changes required |
{{< /responsive-table >}}

**Example configuration migration:**

Legacy configuration:
```yaml
storage_config:
  aws:
    endpoint: s3.amazonaws.com
    region: us-west-2
    bucket_names: example-bucket
    access_key_id: example-key
    secret_access_key: example-secret
    insecure: false
    disable_dualstack: true
    storage_class: STANDARD
```

New configuration:
```yaml
storage_config:
  use_thanos_objstore: true
object_store:
  s3:
    endpoint: s3.amazonaws.com
    region: us-west-2
    bucket_name: example-bucket
    access_key_id: example-key
    secret_access_key: example-secret
    insecure: false
    dualstack_enabled: false
    storage_class: STANDARD
```

### Azure Storage Migration

> When migrating from the legacy Azure storage client to the new Thanos-based client, no changes are required if you are using the following parameters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When migrating from the legacy [Azure](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/<LOKI_VERSION>/configure/#azure_storage_config) storage client to the new Thanos-based client, no changes are required if you are using the following parameters:
```

{{< responsive-table >}}

> | Legacy Parameter | New Parameter | Required Changes |

Reviewer: Would it make sense to put these parameters in alphabetical order?

This is an opt-in feature with the Loki 3.4 release. In a future release, Thanos will become the default way of configuring storage and the existing storage clients will be deprecated.

{{< admonition type="note" >}}
The new storage configuration deviates from the existing format. The following sections describe the changes in detail for each provider.
Refer to the [Thanos storage configuration reference](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/<LOKI_VERSION>/configure/#thanos_object_store_config) to view the complete list of supported storage providers and their configuration options.
{{< /admonition >}}

### Enable the new storage clients

1. Enable Thanos storage clients by setting `use_thanos_objstore` to `true` in the `storage_config` section or by setting the `-use-thanos-objstore` flag to true. When enabled, configuration under `storage_config.object_store` takes effect instead of existing storage configurations.

   ```yaml
   # Uses the new storage clients for connecting to gcs backend
   storage_config:
     use_thanos_objstore: true # enable the new storage clients
     object_store:
       gcs:
         bucket_name: "example-bucket"
   ```

> 1. As an alternative, you can also configure the new clients in the common storage section if you prefer to use the common config section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. As an alternative, you can also configure the new clients in the common `storage` section if you prefer to use the `common` config section.
```

| `bucket_name`       | `bucket_name`         | No changes required                                                                                          |
| `service_account`   | `service_account`     | No changes required                                                                                          |
| `chunk_buffer_size` | `chunk_buffer_size`   | No changes required                                                                                          |
| `enable_retries`    | `max_retries`         | Replace `enable_retries` (bool) with `max_retries` (int). Set a value > 1 to enable retries, or 1 to disable |
| `request_timeout`   | Removed              | Remove parameter                                                                                             |
| `enable_opencensus` | Removed              | Remove parameter                                                                                             |
| `enable_http2`      | Removed              | Remove parameter                                                                                             |
{{< /responsive-table >}}

**Example configuration migration (GCS):**

> Existing configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_**Existing configuration:**_
```

```yaml
storage_config:
  gcs:
    bucket_name: example-bucket
    chunk_buffer_size: 10MB
    enable_retries: true
```

> New configuration (Thanos-based):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_**New configuration**_ (Thanos-based):
```

| `s3`                | Removed               | Remove or replace with `endpoint` if you used the URL-based setup.                                                                 |
| `S3ForcePathStyle`  | Removed or replaced   | If you need path-based addressing, set `bucket_lookup_type: path` in the new config. Otherwise, remove it.                         |
| `signature_version` | Removed               | Remove parameter. Thanos always uses Signature Version 4 (V4).                                                                     |
| `http_config`      | `http`       | Move subfields (such as timeouts, CA file, etc.) into the `http:` block in the Thanos configuration. |
| `sse`              | `sse`        | Migrate any SSE settings (e.g., `type`, `kms_key_id`) into the `sse:` block in the Thanos configuration. |
| `backoff_config`   | `max_retries`| Replace the advanced backoff settings with a single integer (`max_retries`). Set to 1 to disable retries, or a higher value to enable them. |
{{< /responsive-table >}}

**Example configuration migration (S3):**

> _**Existing**_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_**Existing configuration**_
```

```yaml
storage_config:
  aws:
    bucket_names: my-bucket1,my-bucket2   # multiple buckets no longer supported
    endpoint: s3.amazonaws.com
    region: us-west-2
    access_key_id: example-key
    secret_access_key: example-secret
    signature_version: v4
    disable_dualstack: true
    storage_class: STANDARD
    http_config:
      timeout: 1m
      insecure_skip_verify: false
    # ...
    backoff_config:
      max_retries: 5
    sse:
      type: SSE-KMS
      kms_key_id: mySSEKey
```

> _**New** (Thanos-based)_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_**New configuration** (Thanos-based)_
```

| `user_assigned_id` | `user_assigned_id` | No changes required |
| `connection_string` | `connection_string` | No changes required |
| `max_retries` | `max_retries` | No changes required |
| `chunk_delimiter` | `chunk_delimiter` | No changes required |
{{< /responsive-table >}}

If you are using an authentication method other than storage account key or user-assigned managed identity, you'll have to pass the neccessary credetials using environment variables.
For more details, refer to [Azure Identity Client Module for Go](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/Azure/azure-sdk-for-go/sdk/azidentity).

### Filesystem Storage Migration

When migrating from the existing [Filesystem storage](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/<LOKI_VERSION>/configure/#local_storage_config)
client to the new Thanos-based client, update or remove parameters as follows:

{{< responsive-table >}}
| Existing Parameter | New Parameter | Required Changes              |
|-----------------|---------------|-------------------------------|
| `directory`     | `dir`         | Rename `directory` to `dir`.  |
{{< /responsive-table >}}

**Example configuration migration (Filesystem):**

> _**Existing** (`FSConfig`)_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_**Existing configuration** (`FSConfig`)_
```

```yaml
storage_config:
  filesystem:
    directory: /var/loki/chunks
```

> _**New** (Thanos-based)_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_**New configuration** (Thanos-based)_
```
